Oksana [00:00:00] Maybe later, if people 
Oksana [00:00:04] speak speaking loud enough that, you know. 
Oksana [00:00:12] So I guess we could start. 
Oksana [00:00:15] Is everyone feeling comfortable? You know, if you need anything? 
Oksana [00:00:19] Fine. 
Oksana [00:00:20] Great. OK. Um, so um. Well, first of all, we haven't really met with me, so I would like to know what are your expectations from this focus groups? What what were your thoughts when you were coming here? 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:00:40] But my thoughts were to learn about technology now learning more about technology. 
Oksana [00:00:49] Hmm. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:00:50] Um,. I'm not crazy technology, computers, even phones. I use my phone as a computer. I've got a laptop and a tablet about the use of make things right. So, um, that was it, really. And then I thought, Well, we'll learn something today. 
Oksana [00:01:11] Well, yes. So um, essentially you're helping us to shape the technology in a way that would be useful for older people. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:01:21] Yeah. 
Oksana [00:01:22] So this interview is a part of the European project, which is called ageing, which means aged independently and we are working with partners in France, Netherlands and Belgium. So they already conducted these interviews in those countries and we will compare the cultural differences as well. What are the needs of older people in different countries? So research shows that 99 percent of the people actually want to stay at their own homes as they age so well, is it important for you to stay at home? How important is it for you? 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:02:04] Very. And yeah, yeah. 
Oksana [00:02:09] Could you maybe tell me why? 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:02:13] Would you want to go into the, you know, bottom line, you wanted that you want to live on your place and do things in your own time? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:02:31] It's about different disabilities in one way or another. Looking at the less on the forms so that was 50 percent of where we live. People has got different disabilities. Some people we see struggle and when I became disabled I thought, well, I could get worse as I got older and yeah, I want to be able to stay at home. You know, I don't want to be living in fear of people who live after me, or not being able to do things for yourself. And I think we all feel like that, you know? 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:03:10] So that's the reason I came. I love my home. Yeah, I love where I live with my home is, and I came here in the hope that I can learn to stay there as long as I can. And I'd hate to be in a residential care home, for example. It just would not be my scene. 
Oksana [00:03:33] Yeah. Well, so yeah, so 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:03:36] I managed to be. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:03:40] It drives them nuts within a week. 
All [00:03:45] Laughs 
Hazel [00:03:52] Is this something also about the memories that are in your own homes feud or is it just about staying in a physical location? Freedom. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:04:02] Freedom. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:04:03] Yeah, freedom. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:04:04] My memories of being one's own boss. Yeah. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:04:09] Yeah, yeah. You guys have got memories. I mean, looking at a piece of furniture remembering. As a partner, we used to sit in that chair for example. But when you go into these homes, I don't think you're able to take very much with you at all apart from your clothes. All right. That's my understanding. I think 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:04:29] it's that you thought correctly correct? You remember, Bill? Yeah, he's in a care home and he is happy enough. But he's he doesn't see anybody. How come the people in and he was running a video of where we live? He was the light of everybody's life in the, you know, he knew everything about the Barbican and everything he could tell you. He's in his 90s. He could tell you everything. And he was always pleasant to listen to. Um, when you went to a care home, you didn't see a lot of people in the building. You got a coffee mornings when you got down, you know? And so he's got more commonly where he is for each of missiles. He misses his family because they all live north and. To me, I couldn't live like that. You know, so, 
Oksana [00:05:33] yeah, so today we have three different topics, so we're going to look first of all. And what are the important activities for staying in, living independently as you age? And then we're going to look at the barriers and facilitators. So basically things that may help you stay at home longer or things that may prevent you from doing so. So as we discuss things, don't try to be in agreement. If there is discussion, it's totally fine. We are interested to see the diversity of opinions, as well as the following consensus. So don't worry about it, and I really hope that everybody speaks out. We value everyone's opinion. I know that someone might be more shy, so at some point I might actually ask you to speak up directly. And I'm sorry, I will be putting you in uncomfortable position. We're pushing you a little bit. So our first topic is the activities of daily life, and our goal is to find out what are the three most important things like activities for you to age in place right now and in the future, for example, in 10 years, how do you see? And then after we discuss it individually and figure out for each of you, what is it? We'll try to find out the consensus. Maybe for you as a group, could you agree what is more important? So. So we have um, well, I guess the basic activities of the commission is straightforward. I don't know if I need to say this or execution of a task or action by individual could be anything really. Um, the fact that you can move around your house, wake up, take care of yourself. So we have listed the different domains of daily activities, and these are very general and very technical, but they mean actually very concrete things. So I prepared some notes here because they're examples of the activities that could fall on this list. And it feels to me. But please feel free just to think, in general, what is the most important thing for you to to be able to stay in place at home? 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:08:07] Well, this picture? 
Oksana [00:08:09] Not necessarily just give you this picture just for you to to start. If you have no know 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:08:16] daily activities, yes, it is 
Hazel [00:08:19] Is there something that you are maybe a little bit worried that in a few years time, you won't be able to do for yourself, what's the first thing that springs to mind that you think living it by myself, living independently? This is the one thing that I'm worried about not going to be able to do for myself. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:08:37] Get in and out of bed. Well,  just living. It's not an activity, it's just existing. In fact, it's very sensitive to me at the moment because I'm fighting for some way of being able in and out of bed. And it's happening to have a sleep in the chair. And then because they can't find 
Oksana [00:09:00] it so essential, just mobility and self charging 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:09:05] It's not even mobility is just some sort of equipment and means that I don't have to have a carer coming to put me in and out of bed. so if we are getting emotional it's a bit too ... 
Oksana [00:09:20] Yeah, yeah. Well, these are not easy topics to talk about, but he'll be. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:09:28] It's little things that concern me to some extent, I mean, for example, one thing that concerns me is actually having a show of. Now, at the moment, with great difficulty, I might add, I can actually stand up in my best, but it's not easy to actually cross your leg over wow and stand up, but the council have put handrails, so you know, OK, hang on to them and I really appreciate that because without them, there's no way I could get into the best and little things like that I really appreciate. And I just wouldn't like to smell too much. 
All [00:10:05] Laughs 
Hazel [00:10:12] Oh, that's great for you. Well, maybe the better thing would be to have a walk in shower that you don't have to get in and out. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:10:19] Yeah, I have a wheelchair. Yeah, which looks like the standard of the big wheel. Yeah, I have that in my shower room, so I transfer from one wheelchair to another looking out in the shower. I don't like it I would prefer to stand up. I've got bad shoulders and from trying to get the showering 100, you know, and you don't feel like you clean yourself as a proper boy but it is better than a bath. When I lost my leg, I was given one of the chairs a rise and fall from Millbrook. And that was great because then I could just raise myself up turn around the chair and put my feet down. That was from the bath. So I don't know if you've got one of them. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:11:08] I've got an ordinary bath
Speaker 2 (M) [00:11:10] ride to call when you put it in your bath. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:11:13] Oh no, I got nothing in the bath except the best mate drive 
Oksana [00:11:18] sort of stopping, which is thing about policy thinkers. And that's exactly what they're talking about right now. So they're smart and raising funds and all of these things. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:11:29] Yeah, I didn't know they existed till I got one. Yeah. And I thought. And anybody struggling to get in and out of a bath of bullying about slipping falling in the bath. I mean, say we really, for me, a period in my confidence that started off with a bench going across the bath and I nearly went headfirst into the touch. And so I was at seven. Not we're not going to forget, you know, 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:11:59] that period of time where we moved when I moved to now. Most of us got wet rooms. I think there's only one fly out the 34. It's got a bath. And their ideal for us, even if you only want a walking yeah, like I say, I was given that wheel chair just sat on that and it is quite comfy cushions say, you know, it's great. 
Oksana [00:12:27] So is there anything else important? So we said already getting in the bus for someone else, what is what is important? 
Hazel [00:12:36] Somebody mentioned cooking, cleaning, somebody mentioned cooking. How are people managing with cooking for themselves? Is that something that you worry that in the future? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:12:47] Not for me? 
All [00:12:48] Laughs 
Hazel [00:12:55] Yeah. How would you feel about, you know, cooking meals at home? Is that something that you feel that in a few years time is going to be difficult? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:13:01] Yeah, that that bothers me because I have neuropathy means so don't feel heat straight away. Um, when I moved back in, I'm now four years ago, I was in a wheelchair. I'm in my bedroom. Very rarely wore it. Don't do this impression, but the important hello worked for me. I didn't have open air fryer and a small hub that was great while I was in the chair that was worried about leaning forward, bending down to get to the Oven. And even now I can bend down. Sometimes I can lose me balance, so it didn't bother me. And I think as I got older, personally that does concern me. You know, I've I lost me there like that. Be it, then I wouldn't be cooking takeaways. Yeah. 
Oksana [00:13:57] So some members haven't said much. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:14:00] I like talking! 
All [00:14:01] Laughs 
Oksana [00:14:06] My job is to make sure that everyone speaks. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:14:08] Yeah, well, not at the moment, but stairs, perhaps at some point in the future. 
Oksana [00:14:13] So also walking around the house, we have stairs in your house.
Speaker 3 (F) [00:14:17] Yes. Well, also outside the house is two dozen stairs up from the road to the house, so maybe I'll have to move at some point. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:14:27] Oh, there will be no look area,. 
Oksana [00:14:31] Anything else. Maybe something that's not so practical, maybe like socialising, do you? Things that could be a problem. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:14:40] Transport is probably one chance for trying to get in and out because they can't use buses or taxis because I have difficulty trying to get into a door had trouble getting your car, you know? Yeah, and quite tall. Not quite as you bend, I've got back and hip problem. I can't kind of move properly. It's difficult with me. So is transport is a an issue. 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:15:06] I'm glad you mentioned that because transport will be the top of my list. And the reason being that as long as I can get on a bus and I can celebrate it in a bus stop, I can see my children and one lives in Launceston. One lives in Woodbridge and two and a half hours on the bus. But the only problem I've got with buses are and get on the bus at the moment and get off. But. I've got a hopefully I can manage without a wee until I get to Bodmin. 
All [00:15:37] Laughs 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:15:40] pretty soon because it stops them enough above me for me to get out and have a pea that I've got to tell you this too. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:15:53] Yeah, yeah, no. I'm sure I could go all the way to Bodmin to do a wee, awfull. 
Hazel [00:15:58] So it because you're not involved with the things that we've been doing in the past. During lockdown, we've done a lot of things online on Zoom and Facebook Messenger. I was just curious as to how people feel. Is that something that they liked, didn't like? Is that way of socialising maybe in the future? Or did they think that, you know, face to face with the glasses? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:16:19] Yeah, I've already mentioned we're right. Yeah. You know, I've been since, you know, legally here. 
Hazel [00:16:29] It's not technological. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:16:30] It's no, definitely not. But um. I think it's a good way of being in contact with people in families. I know it's nice to be together, but with everything we've gone through, you know, on Zoom or other social media, you can be your messenger through Facebook and it is good you can see your family talking to, you know, um, 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:17:00] without it through your lockdown, you wouldn't have seen anybody that didn't have no children with anybody who didn't have that. You're isolated you 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:17:10] thinking, Oh yeah. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:17:12] I mean, I think the said, I know it's unusual that the pandemic will take the effect on mental health as being. Of jobs, 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:17:24] I struggle with it when I thought I had to isolate, because that meant taking early last year was to say isolate for 14 days. I struggled to quell my scooter to try to avoid everybody. Well, no shops open in town show free travel around there, but it can get scary as well. And I think I'm more scared now than it was last year, and I think it's because of the understanding of it about both the Jabs obsessive test yourself twice a week. But we have a great community where we live. We're lucky, we're very lucky, and we all realise that, um, we had nobody had the infection or anything like that, you know, the virus. So and we do sit downstairs. I'm not in the community when we weren't allowed to use that, but it's still sitting in the main entrance. You know, I don't 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:18:23] do or out in the courtyard, you know, so we had the communication wasn't too bad for us. But if you look what your own in your own house and I think you're more isolated than I think communication right through technology is in really, you know. 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:18:43] When some people can't drive a car, that's how you do notoriety before then. Once you try to ?  During lockdown I was stuck for two years. Yes. We just live in a bedroom and that's it is a shared house for four people. And I wouldn't go see it. 
Oksana [00:19:03] So everyone would say that this kind of digital communication is very important. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:19:09] And I just don't think even though we've got a community, we do face to face just in our reality now. You know, while they are still things like, do they really, I don't know what we would have done 40 years ago. I really don't, you know, so 
Hazel [00:19:27] I'm not someone just to explain Eric, david and Gaynor live in our sheltered schemes. So there is a small community, OK, that whereas Sheila, Joyce, I'm not sure you did separately? Yeah, yeah. And Cliff were in their own independent properties, so there isn't a community there, so, yeah, OK. We were doing something different. 
Oksana [00:19:51] So, yes, different. So how the hell do we have a community? Did you meet regularly or do you see your family more often? How do you do this? 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:20:04] You know, I was very, very lucky at the very beginning. I had a heart bypass and my daughter took me up to Kent to stay with her. Unfortunately, not going to school. I was there, so she got stuck with me for three weeks, unfortunately. And you know, any excuse because they brought me back in time or had my first job in Kent and they brought me back to have a second one here. Uh huh.. I must be horrible. Well, it doesn't bother me. I mean, where I live, we don't have a community centre. We don't have anywhere we can go and talk. So I was in the courtroom every day, but I just didn't 
Oksana [00:20:58] see her going for a walk every 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:20:59] day. Yeah. Well, I'm lucky I live on the Hoe. Oh, so I've only I've only got to walk five minutes. I'm actually on the Hoe a life long live every day for a little walk and talk again. I mean, I used to see some of the neighbours, but. You know, we didn't mix.
Speaker 5 (F) [00:21:20] is the ones that couldn't get out in the community. I mean, there's the bungalows and we could see if we couldn't meet up with them and it was fun to see people there was certain neighbours that we had couldn't leave home. I don't blame them. And it could be that. And I love the interaction of people. But without Zoom and teams and all that, I well, I would recommend. Definitely. I mean, I wouldn't have been able to see my family without the internet. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:21:53] I haven't got the internet or and I don't use the computer now just it doesn't bother me from the get go and don't bother me when I have to contact firms and they 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:22:11] or doctors. Doctors, now that they are nightmares now because I'm trying to get hold on to an e-consult and if you're not on the internet now, for your prescriptions and contacting doctors. That is huge!
Speaker 5 (F) [00:22:27]  yeah. Well, there again, I'm very lucky because when I want my prescription, I'll just bring up a little chemist in West Hoe and they they just routinely get it and they deliver it to me. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:22:41] I hope they are not going to stopping that. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:22:43] Yeah, I'm very lucky. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:22:44] They've been very good press so of. I mean, I'm not with them, but some the our residents are yeah. And you know, I mean, that struggle. I don't even have to pay for my prescriptions. I got a text message from Boots's chemist because of pain and your prescription is ready for collection and closes the book. The booth came back only 10 minutes, you know? Yeah. So our customer, so we've been lucky like that. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:23:13] How did you set that up? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:23:16] But I was with Lloyds in Devonport. Then when I moved, I told my doctor that my prescription is going to Boots. And at the start, I had to keep ringing up, ringing up, getting prescriptions that over now Boots supply for it, for me. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:23:35] My surgery will let you know what. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:23:38] We won't now go back four years ago. You know, these are driving where we have all agreed for, you know what I need from when they need it. So, OK, OK. 
Hazel [00:23:51] Did some of your telephone consultations with your doctors?
Speaker 3 (F) [00:23:55] And also this kind of forgotten health care. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:24:00] I forgot how my Doctor looks like,. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:24:03] Well, how can they see what you look like? It's only telephone. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:24:08] Yeah, that's my issue. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:24:09] and you know, especially with the chest problem, and it's a bit of a telephone consultation. And when I say it's a consultation, a conversation because you will only be hearing huh huh down the phone ... 
All [00:24:20] Laughs 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:24:23] from the phone down and you prevent even breathe. 
Oksana [00:24:27] But we still have some participants, that didn't say much. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:24:36] Well, I was just thinking of touch wood how fortunate I am at the moment. I did have a partner who has a lot of difficulties that you seem to have. Yeah, you make a good point. Most of your doctors, but all sort of organisations I wanted to get in touch about my television license. And there's no number to ring them. Very annoying. And yet I've done so well. 
Oksana [00:25:09] So it seems like communication is quite can be more for everyone. Can, right? 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:25:16] You know, I mean, I tried to ring with William, and I try to ring them the other day, and I didn't find a number, My grand daughter found it on the computer and I rang them. Oh, you've come to the wrong place, you should go for hero. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:25:30] Yeah, I do get annoyed, really, don't you all? 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:25:33] Yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:25:35] Yeah, it is very hard for trying to communicate concretely for people. And I think that's where you get fed up. And I think some people just give up to try to communicate with them. The next thing to get electricity, to know why you're doing this, why are you doing that? And again, people get put under pressure. Well, you know, it's it's horrible. Yeah, it's I'm quite fortunate I do get your scam calls, you know, text messages from my provider BT. And if I'm not sure I ring BT up, you know, saggy pants and stuff like that, you know so well, a lot of people don't know how to do all lot, you know? 
Oksana [00:26:17] Yeah, I wonder, like, I have to do everything myself. So I wonder how would someone do it without access? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:26:24] I read about after quite a lot of our residents doing jobs for them and things like that. It's something in my nature. I would reward myself and I used to work for, Yeah, and I still do it now. You know, that's what keeps me going mentally. You know, without all that I don't know, I'll be there enough income of our party, you know? 
Hazel [00:26:51] How about your banking and your bills, because a lot of that now this is online.  Because I know a lot of people are quite happy to do some things online, but actually financial transactions as a whole. All kinds of people are not so confident.
Speaker 5 (F) [00:27:10] unless there is a  danger now if you were not switched on to the scam, they'll go and say, Oh, something with your back press one. As soon as you press one. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:27:22] Yeah, that's it. Yeah. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:27:23] And you do it automatically like the something with the police and comics, as you know in the show. Yeah. They will panic, you know, at the moment of screen time, and I don't think so. And. But I would think you'd be lucky, he said, just don't don't don't engage conversation with people. But people do! yeah, and they get caught and they lose an awful amount of money. There's people out there, though this is awful, awful evil creatures that know it. And again, just because everything is online or on the phone. That's how you get people's lives in danger for all this technology 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:28:07] to do something very plausible, the people very and I sometimes tell our residents like I've had this scam call, if you get a scam call or they're asking you to BT again, we say my payment last month hasn't gone through and they take my details. Well, I've checked my bank statement. I know that it was paid, so I didn't have to do anything else. I just blocked the numbers. But they come back with different numbers 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:28:37] oh they did 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:28:38] So it's it's never ended, and I don't think it will stop the way we're going to stop it. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:28:48] There is a way for these big companies don't want to. 
Oksana [00:28:51] And if I may ask like we're getting this over important like areas that are necessary for survival. Yeah, but maybe there is something that is just important for the mood or the people, some that you wouldn't like to let go. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:29:10] You can't keep. Yes. Yeah. We have agreed to our place doing Taichi every Monday afternoon. I start doing it with them well, so a lot of them, our regulars, that they drifted off along with what your you can't be with the big group and this group called the Barbican legends, which there were a lot around the Barbican. They were coming in, doing this Taichi. It is very good for you. 
Oksana [00:29:40] Definitely. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:29:41] And it's a great way of being able to meet up with people. But at the moment it is not right to do. Um, I think they started it again and 
Hazel [00:29:52] They started it again, but they. They've been a different venue now because I think they were probably told that they couldn't go back to Brok House, I don't know. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:30:01] Yeah, for now we can't. 
Hazel [00:30:03] Yeah, it was. It was Elder tree. I think it was a available for Barbican legends too, but it was for Elder tree. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:30:09] That's right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:30:12] So if I can just just go back three spaces. Somebody mentioned television licences. Now there's no getting away from the fact that television is very important to elderly people who are confined to their own home. Yeah, now I'm 82 soon be 83, and I've got a TV licence because they stop the free ones. And this week, for example, I got a message to renew my television licence, and I haven't done so because I got so annoyed that the millions and millions of people have not even done last year's licence. And yet, so I think because it's so important that elderly people have the facility legally to watch television, it ought to be sorted out. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:30:57] Yeah, I get mine to be renewed every year automatically, and I don't know why, because by the people I to. 
Oksana [00:31:05] So it's also communication issue.
Speaker 4 (M) [00:31:06] I don't mind paying, but I do expect other people to expect other people to pay. 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:31:11] A little bit of back, some decent television. 
All [00:31:14] Laughs 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:31:17] The repeat programmes, you could expect a double bill for your licence. 
All [00:31:21] Laughs. 
Oksana [00:31:22] OK, so let me put some ideas in for each one of you individually. So they're quite particular, but we can take them out and figure the links later. So getting out of bed, so for moving around the house and taking a shower, cooking also stairs, people that the problems with mobility they have taken transformation. A lot of problems with communication with the administrative services, medical services, um, also just with family, I guess. 
Oksana [00:32:03] So I wonder if you could discuss a little bit in a group without me. And if you could condense just kind of top activities as a group that you find are the most important?  All of you to begin with. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:32:28] Well, we'll just make one comment on digital communication. I didn't actually comment when it was discussed. I use a zoom, a great deal and sometimes that as many as 400 people can go on Zoom sessions from around the world little corners of the world had never heard of. 
Oksana [00:32:49] So how do you use it? 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:32:50] How do I use it? 
Oksana [00:32:51] What? 
Oksana [00:32:52] What is the kind of Zoom call that you don't? Sorry. What is the kind of Zoom call that you're doing? 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:32:57] I use it for groups of which I am myself a member and the worldwide groups, and I use it for church activities, which I am a member. And I also use it digitally for communicating with my children with a portal, which is a magic machine. I just make telephone calls by saying to the television, Please ring Harry and Harry's on the television. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:33:28] I also wondered about that one. Well, I'd probably get it for my family. Well. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:33:32] So having said that, I'm not keen on it if I think about it deeply because it really does eliminate social interaction. Person to person, yes. So although I'm spot on a bit of a coward in a way, I use it. But. The back of my head says I don't really agree with this. 
Oksana [00:33:59] So is it helpful and unhelpful at the same time?
Oksana [00:34:03] Yes. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:34:04] So it is both
Speaker 2 (M) [00:34:07] I would say the pope was there on a big TV screen. You can see the state that was behind the screen and completely look like you got real bad luck. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:34:19] I only got this because one of my kids bought it for Christmas. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:34:22] Yeah. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:34:24] No, I think I said digital interaction. Um, communication is important, but there are still a lot of people that don't have that. They don't want to. You know, I'm. I got it for just over two years, and I'm still scratching the surface with it, um. People come to me and ask me. Because so wrong when we computed hello. No, but your son can work for the education services on I.T., you know? So, um, I'm more a practical person. 
Oksana [00:35:04] Well, digital communication is like a tool. Right? It's not your activity. Yeah, it depends what you use it for. So you can say families are important for me as activities. It's very important for me and we'll put it right now or communication with a medical services or the strength of services. Those are different things, right? So maybe digital communication would be good for one, but then for another? Yeah. Um, so yeah. So I think I'm talking too much here, but we still need some kind of consensus from you guys. 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:35:41] Well, the way I've been thinking. I'm sorry and everything things down because I'm so used to doing it. It seems to be self-care, social interaction, and I guess it's not so magical. So it's self-care. And that breaks up into all sorts of activities, social interaction and medical and financial. Accessing those. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:36:11] You're good. 
All [00:36:16] Laughs I know the summarisation of older. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:36:29] Do you think that a lot of people think a realise that you know about self-care, that is important 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:36:35] exactly what is it? See, I use 40 words but two would do. Yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:36:41] All the different activities tells us that it's totally those
Speaker 2 (M) [00:36:44] same as activities, you know, even though it's essential to you. You know, I've got to have a bath. It's an activity or a shower. You know, it's an activity. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:36:57] But this session don't, isn't it? 
All [00:36:58] Laughs 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:37:01] People say to me, Always enjoy what you do or enjoy doing what you do. I have got saving for life, and I'm fortunate to have that. Um? Well, so, I've seen people that hasn't, you know, people 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:37:19] with it, isn't it? Two things of the three important things is some of the things you want to do, but there's some things you have to do of those, those three, all the activities you have to do. You have to look after yourself. What was the middle name again? 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:37:35] So social, interactive. Yeah, your health and well-being is included in your social and stuff. 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:37:47] Because there was no idea. OK. She's not confused. I'm lucky because all I do is to jump on the bus and go into town do some shopping there is this. I was used to thinking of reserves with that stuff. Yeah, yeah. Tuesdays I used to go for lunch at the church in Glenfield. That's yeah. Well, now I make myself go into water for a walk on the road or catch the bus in the town. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:38:17]  and it's important. Yeah, if you talk about what's in the three top important things it's important to and yeah, I think I just think you're good. 
All [00:38:27] Oh dear, laughs
Speaker 4 (M) [00:38:30] But I think the transport as a part of social interaction is vital. I mean, for example, I've got a son who's a copper in Launceston. Yeah. Now I'm going to hop on the bus right outside my door. No one from here to those tables that hop on the bus and I get off at Tesco's in Launceston, which is eight minutes for my son, he collects me in the car. Yeah, I'm just starting to get some of the best of Tesco's naturally, but 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:38:59] then I'm fortunate I've got a car hold beloved for. I don't know what I do generally road some of the residents around to the garden centres that help yourself, you know, so I've got no taxis but waste money on taxis, you know that. So I enjoy getting out excuse to get out. And so that is important to me. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:39:23] Um, with transport going on that, yeah, I'm limited. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:39:27] Yes, you are. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:39:28] Yeah, yeah. But I mean, I'm pretty nifty getting on and off both the load, the ramp and stuff. Yeah, crashed of the south on the bus that we gloss over that. But it would be here if it's not on the bus route. There's only a certain type of taxi. I can have a map, but you probably yeah, it comes back to transport. It is huge. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:39:50] Yeah, yeah. Is there any approximation when you crashed on the bus I worked with was comedy, a nightclub, three buses in the depot. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:39:58] So I burst in because the crowds in the way that I went because it felt I felt pressured to do that and put the post goes quiet because I do like to use to drive. I do reverse parking and they'll go, Oh, you know, the flashing to the side? Yeah, something out. 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:40:19] I don't know his picture post. You can't, you 
Speaker 1 (M) [00:40:24] know, it's a self-drive 'cause people make up, they go off, right? And I had two arguments to have taxi drivers in Plymouth but I didn't hear. He started giving me a lot of, you know, doing that and I'll get off an engineering and technology made.You would think a lot about Typekit. I think more people are going to get hit by a car, but yeah,. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:40:48] They are know what you're saying, but it's all about climate change and people have to suffer with climate change and not just because of climate change. Electric cars, like you said, they're very quiet. I've never stepped out looking the wrong way, but you know, you don't ever call me, you know, so there's no 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:41:08] way they can let you know I'll meet someone who's I've been down to the Did you come from home? Yeah, I'm going 
Speaker 6 (F) [00:41:17] to say this about the guide dogs. All that because the guide dogs go by what they can hear. Yeah, yeah. So it's really massive. Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
Oksana [00:41:27] Yeah, actually, we are kind of naturally drifted into the second topic about things and help prevent us like aging independently. But I suggest we take a break because we've been here for an hour this. Going so let's take a break. I'll try to think they'll probably say that to me. I've heard about reason, think that there is radioactive setting up like water treatment or something of that sort of thing. Or at least try to leave it to me to fix the problem and repeat it. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:42:11] It's not been introduced. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:42:14] No, I know 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:42:15] what it's 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:42:16] like coming otherwise three three years in this place. But in the Pines University here, 50 years ago, it's never, never 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:42:26] been a polytechnic. Yes. Yeah, I think so. She's very down. That's all you need to know. Oh, yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:42:44] But it was a complete idiot or not. One thing I miss is my driving licence and I can't drive. And I just let it lapse, like living in France and Belgium, and I didn't need one because this is I just never one of  ...
Speaker 4 (M) [00:45:26] Yeah, we're getting my driving licence back. It is not impossible that they have a point because I'm insulin dependent diabetic and had four heart bypass. I have cancer twice. They take all these medical things into account. And because you're over 80 years , You wait for years to get your driving licence, which is really going to make it hard to just renewed your degree and wouldn't have any problems in this country. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:53:19] When you think of how the world's changed in the past 80 years, it's just a man. Yeah, and frightening. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:53:25] Oh yes, totally. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:53:29] see these films that come out, you know, robots.
Speaker 4 (M) [00:53:41] But a very Victorian upbringing wouldn't even have electric vehicle guests if that oil lamps, no wireless or anything like that.
Speaker 2 (M) [00:53:53] it's kind of my generation now. You know, I mean, I can't imagine having a television since I was a toddler. But when microwave was coming you give me pause and think that now you feel like I can't give me that one? 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:54:11] Well, my wife wouldn't have one she wouldn't use it to get the room microwave oven. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:54:16] Well, I think everyone was horrified. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:54:19] Well, I think we read you talk about radiation and not what you think. You find that you know what's going to happen. 
Speaker 3 (F) [00:54:28] We were worried about what's coming out of the Blue Submarine. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:54:31] So I went to my well, I spent most of her time in the spinning wheel to yeah, yeah, straight on the spinning room. And she was very well as well. 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:54:41] And frankly, that was 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:54:45] in an antique shop in the day and the end of the old toys. You know, and it's just like this spring on it and this little bobbing on it, you know, it was kids entertainment. Then, you know, and then you try and get a kid now like you one of them night that five year old knows how to use a computer about the knowledge. And it's. Oh yes. So I do have dyslexia, you know, so I struggle with things and not very retellings have to be told this is what you've got to do. Something finished telling me I've forgotten the first part. You know, so I don't know what going to be like in seventy years. I've no idea. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:55:50] That that scares me. I want to run a self-drive car sitting in a car andI can't control the steering wheel which is moving along the motorway that terrifies me. I like to be in control. 
Oksana [00:56:03] And what about my ride like a train? Train is a kind of like a self-driving car. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:56:09] Well, we are in a way because we, you know, somebody at the front and control. You know that because that is 
Speaker 4 (M) [00:56:18] You don't know that on the docklands light rail that drives itself.
Oksana [00:56:26] That's very often the trains don't have a conductor, right? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:56:30] Yeah. And when you talk about planes without pilots, I mean, I won't even go on a plane anyway, you know, with the pilot 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:56:39] of these cars. Driverless cars? Yeah. But you know, there's not a lot goes wrong with the mechanics of the computer. Who do you blame in? And I think both someone killed recently. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:56:53] Yeah, that was yes. Yeah, yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah, yeah. I wouldn't know. Did frighten me. Right? The Wi-Fi goes down. You go, Okay,. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:57:02] If I get in the left hand drive car. Yeah. Even though I know so many drive, you know where I'll be banging my feet on the floor when you go to a break and you just instinctively think you've been driving for a long time. Yeah. And I mean, even get my car out of an adapted factory to be left for the accelerator and the brake, and for 40 years I've been driving. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:57:27] How did you get on doing that? Because they tried me with it? 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:57:31] It was easier than I thought. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:57:34] I wrote off the gearbox. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:57:37] What I did before I got the car, I got in touch with a driving school that caters for disabled people. And when I got in the car and I said, Look, I'll be driving this in seventy nine, I said. Now the problem, do not say anything about my driving this bad. Tell me, but I don't want to be criticised, you know, because you have old habits and drive you driving your own way. And I was a bit edgy, $40 a throw, and it was only a tiny little car, you know, and I thought, I'm going to do wheelies and I brake I brake too sharp, so I have to concentrate on that. Then the car got the Nissan Qashqai sitting in there. It looks massive extra to get it. OK, now driving that for a couple of weeks, I was nervous. Is that on the road? Because trying to get out of style where I live onto the main road and I'm waiting for traffic to grow. I've got a gap and I just hit it slightly too hard. We're spending trying to get out, but now no problem. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:58:53] Well, what they did with me because I can drive by right next. I can swap to. So the process was 19. Yeah. And occasionally the automatic. What do you do? I panicked because it took me straight out into the main road which I did think it was stupid. Yeah. And so I was I was I was nervous, so it didn't make any sense. What don't you do with an automatic car? 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:59:21] Yeah, I've done my right leg suddenly burst into life, I suppose. 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:59:26] Yeah, I've done that. Come up, take Pulling away the automatic changed gear. 
Speaker 5 (F) [00:59:36] Into face to face, so to drive. But yeah, 
Speaker 2 (M) [00:59:40] it was the first time I drove an automatic car. Not adapted. Yeah, not a standard automatic car wasn't concentrated as it pulled away before it went to the clutch. I hit the foot brake. Yeah, I mean, by the way, through the windscreen fortunate to the seatbelt umm 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:00:04] Oh, well, then you go on that. Yeah, it was just  you're naturally link stink when you're driving. In some betting. You can just get in the car. You don't think about anything. You can get and off you go, All right. And again, with all that I'm going off to Manchester in a couple of weeks. Yeah, I've never been further than IKEA Exeter and looked a bit nervous on the A38 driving fast I don't know why. I mean, there's going to be in Manchester I don't know how how many times it's just one go basically. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:00:43] I can't drive now, it's one of the drive and you just really. Quite dangerous. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I am not supposed to drive anyway.
Speaker 2 (M) [01:00:55] Yeah, well, I've got mobility scooter that I use in town quite a lot you know, but I'll throw in the big free cash flow and. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:01:04] I've got an ability scooter as well. Things I don't know. I would have come on that today ...
Speaker 2 (M) [01:01:17] Well, that's it. I've got daily fit to motorbike change. So when I finally managed to keep my scooter outside anyway, I'll change it off. yeah. even if it just showed a sign outside the shop that changed to that, you know? Yes, I've been very fortunate to have the ...
Hazel [01:02:15]  Yes. Your next communitarian thought about virtual cooking? Yeah. So so you can do what you have at the time, which is kind of ... 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:03:28] The other robot brought was a cat. It was a cat seating on your lap. We have to right be outside TG. This is nine to nine this is not what the carer describes it's coming back...She wanted to buy it. So she wanted to buy it. That was a hundred sixty pounds. Other robot like this you did with Astro came in and said...Well, she locked the cap and she wanted it to buy it. And she says to Hazel I've got the money here and I'll give you the money  laughs it's safe to. They give it to Eric. He can sort it...laughs
Speaker 4 (M) [01:04:17] I know, a bit of a dinosaur. I'm quite frightened for the future over there. Well, I think technology has advanced far too rapidly. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:04:26] Well, I think that's probably where a lot of people struggle with it. Either don't do that and I don't put PCH a big grade with doing the computer courses where they but there's a lot of places on the dome, but you got to pay to go and it can be very expensive. So,. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:04:49] People are supposed to deliver houses and so they don't do well. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:04:54] No, no. I mean, I always felt well, not always but recently the PCH felt a bit get a bit too controlling over us now. Yeah. When the rules change because of covid, we don't get told until a month after and we have a lot of us are desperate to get back to the coffee mornings and the bingo afternoon we can use the community room. We can't just use the kitchen. And I said, Well, Bring your coach down for tea and coffee, you know? And I'm borrowing a cow out in the courtyard. Oh, OK. A lot more can carry hot drinks on their own, you know, so they I got so oh, you can't do that. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:05:38] Well, what about this is the percentage of buildings with these thermal cups? Yeah, you can get some of them is what we're trying to do is say thank you can how even though the sort of thing and bring your own drink, you know how it's going to work because honestly, I'm just like, I just manage, yeah. And if I go to shows and stuff, oh, well, we're going to try and find to have those cardboard trays thinking about it so we can help people. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:06:09] Yeah, right. I've got a cup holder which clips up the week and the wheelchair. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:06:15] Oh, have you? 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:06:16] And I got it with a thermal cup. So the thermal cup  will fit in there. You can buy them. Usually Because you can adjust, you can adjust the the whole, you know, the the clip on it. Um, whether they want that, I don't know. I mean, if you was a guy, I've got thermal cups mine are that old now. No, they don't overheat that much. Um, but like you said, talking to my sister last night, she said, Well, you know, I thought if we got thermal cups then you can bring it down, a lot of them got what they call them...
Speaker 2 (M) [01:07:12] What we're saying is, you know, like, maybe this was a sale in the courtyard. A lot of them can't bring hot drinks down. I've suggested they put the the tea and the coffee in their own cups bring it down now, Boiler Co in the courtyard. But Debbie said, No, you can't do that. Do that. I don't understand why. Well, yeah. 
Oksana [01:07:35] Yeah, unfortunately, time is not stopping the uh. So we have two topics to discuss now. They're very closely related. We're gonna be talking. Excellent. We thought you were sort of already talking about this from the beginning. So all the things that help you stay in place and all the things that prevent you from staying in place as you age. So, yeah, we were talking about different devices. Is like for thinking boss things like that. So first of all, the environmental factors that can influence physical environment. So basically saying that you have in your house, it might be helpful. For example, you mentioned the railings in the bathroom are the digital devices that help you communicate with family and with administrative things. Maybe even, uh, well, some pets or some plans that make you happy. Maybe the weather could be one of those factors. Basically, everything around you that there is a present is it helps you or prevents you. So first of all, he has a question that they want to ask you is. So what kind of external physical factors are helping you to age in place now or in the future? So what is the influence of your physical environment on your daily activities? So all the things that help you? So we were talking about the telephone and internet, right? So what else can we do with that? 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:09:28] I've got about anybody else. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:09:31] I think I have made my kitchen was not there. So I think that the wheelchair in the house is one thing. But if you will, in the future, going to have to have mobility equipment like I have a walker as well a space around and that you the units and of that can be dropped if you like can be lowered and which might have been so I can sit in the wheelchair does under certain types of kitchen things that my oven I can't have one with the dropped down door , it's not safe for me, but I have one of those those sliding they are brilliant. So that's socially but not so you can just explain it is cheap, and. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:10:26] I didn't quite understand what this door is. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:10:29] Have you ever seen bake off the bake off it, right? What they do, but be put an oven door down what it does disappears underneath it slides underneath.Yeah, because I can't have anything in front of me. I've got to be able to be right in front of the oven book because it slides on. I think it's called Hide and Slide or something like that. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:10:50] Yeah, I understand. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:10:51] And it's it's excellent for that unless you hang on to it. If you try to move on, it goes and slides and, you know, expect it will go on the issue. But the other thing is, what about that? But it's it's brilliant for that because I can go in front and in the wheelchair, sometimes not too heavy. I go to the side. So the kitchen equipment, I think, and otherwise I wouldn't use the oven. It's as simple as that and it's got to be easily accessible.
Oksana [01:11:31] Anything else comes to mind? 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:11:37] If you look in technology and internet stuff it's kind of sounds awful generations come and go as they age, they will be brought up with this man. It's the wall of the rest of us. So the older ones now generation today, the generation that the older generation that I'm no longer the older again generation, maybe that has never used the internet and are still frightened of it, but that will adapto us, yeah, but as the years go on. Sounds awful. As the new generations come up they will, they will embrace all of this. And which we maybe not
Speaker 2 (M) [01:12:21] answerable now like the zoom. I mean, it might be simpler than the same I've never used zoom We've used a different type of media thing to use, but weren't operating now the guy who runs our mention he was operating it sometimes successfully, sometimes not. It is technical technology challenge if you like, love it laughs. The colleague I'm talking about. Well, it's. That sort of thing, if somebody said to me, Oh, you need to get on to this, you need to get on to that. That scares me. Like you say, it does scare you technology, am I going to be using computers for about 22 years and I'm still just scratching the surface. I can do e-mails. 
Oksana [01:13:13] What does scare you?
Speaker 2 (M) [01:13:13] I don't know what it is. I think it's a fear of the unknown. And you read about all the scams. But I mean, I can do the basics. I can send the emails attachments, I can open the emails. So to me, I can do what's important to me. Um. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:13:30] But it's not what it's about. Why would you have to if you're doing enough to meet your needs? That's what it's about. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:13:40] It does for me. You know, like I say, I use my phone to do it. I've got a laptop not used for about three years. I've got a tablet. I get a struggle on that when trying to get onto the home page I need. I used to ask a friend to bring them up, saying I'm struggling come around, he sort everything out for me. I don't see him now. and the other friend that did it. And unfortunately, she passed away. So I feel like I'm on my own now and I feel really at a loss because where I live, I'm probably one of the youngest. You know, so there are some who use the internet, but mainly for shopping or ordering food online. And that's it. No, I don't do that. You know, I'm old fashioned, so I just like to, uh. I'm happy with what I can do But there were a couple of time later on when I make stuck in the house and I need to do more on the computers and things like that, and I just don't absorb it there. I do have a problem with dyslexia, but I know what the government member is. 
Oksana [01:14:53] Would you say it's a helpful thing. Would you say it's OK for you? 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:14:57] To me at the moment is helpful, but there are people that have made that go insane. It's all. And I think people do struggle with it. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:15:08] I struggle with that. Yeah. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:15:10] You know, so if it's like you say, it's what you said, so you need to give it. You want older people to embrace it as because they don't need it, make it easier. Make it less scary. Yeah, they get that. Sometimes these iPhones. I mean, I love it. I'm a geek. Yeah. As soon as therie is a new technology I want it! But I'm lucky enough to become A.. I've got friends that was so, you know, can't understand it. The technical wording is too difficult if you make it simple wording. Yet I just say press number one press number two fine. Why would you just interface? You know this? I love it, but I don't understand a lot of it. Make it easy. We want older people or people who are scared of it to to embrace the technology. Make it every dayable. Yeah, if that makes sense. Right? 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:16:20] Maybe some people are scared by technology, including me. Some people are not like Hazel or she doesn't know about technology. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:16:31] Not as good as critics. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:16:33] For example, I think it will become to some extent now. We don't see on the news all the hundreds and hundreds of people who are losing their life savings through internet banking. And they are. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:16:46] Yes, I saw on the news with the eBay alone in the southwest, 25million stolen through scammers that we see in the southwest. You know, I've been ripped off. Nothing massive. The first one was about twenty five pound instead of six ninety nine. So I'm very dubious of what I go on to buy anything. And so it's very rare buying if you online, I go radiates cover for one of the residents. I'm supposed to be near to the. He didn't want to do it. He wanted me to do it. Yes, it looked the same. I was getting to the point where I was looking at the scene and I thought, I don't recognise that company name and don't recognise that company name. So I rang up my sister she said tribe from world. Don't do radiates covers, what they do, and you get special offers, so I ordered in that we've got it. So the next one he wants we'll order through the same company because we know it's genuine. Yeah. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:17:50] Don't you find it like your eyes on ebay, as you said, Oh, there's marvellous tablet! It should be 700 for 200 if you think you're going to get the genuine thing 200...
Speaker 2 (M) [01:18:02] No. You know, if it sounds too good to be true, then it is. 
Oksana [01:18:06] Yeah. Line is on line is the same thing. Yeah, yeah. I wonder if we could just go a little bit more down to Earth. Yeah. So we mentioned the stairs as a barrier. So things like that, so can everyone may like just a few things that you find are barriers for you. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:18:30] Stairs without banisters for me. So especially without was a bit of banisters to. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:18:39] Well, I wouldn't be without my handrails up the stairs now, and I didn't ask for. Oh, I've no reason to rub it down, but about four bypasses I've lost all my energy to having had colon cancer twice an insulin dependent diabetic. All sorts of things. And when I was last in hospital, they certainly organised at all these rails and I couldn't do without them now. But you know, I manage if but they were then and. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:19:09] I couldn't even let me stay and I can't. I've got two options, you know,. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:19:12] So I've got bars all around my house, even if that's possible, because when I go home, I've tried to make myself show for like four stuff stuff. Yeah, I think wherever I put my hand and, well, I set up. That's why we need your help when you come in the hole every everywhere around the world. So do not think you should design. So let's make it open. Right. But I'm going to go around the outside world. Yeah, because everybody everywhere I put my hand, I need a handrail. Yeah, there's basic, that's not technology, that's just 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:19:47] and whatever people might say about PCH. I mean, saying this year, but I found the wonderful, Oh yeah, yeah, I'm the beast and I own the property. I don't own the sort of walls and things, but that where I had a problem, they've done marvellous. The job and charge me quarter is because they have taken the bathroom and it was coming from the maisonette above mine and they spent four days with plumbers and carpenters. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:20:15] You yeah, you don't got a landlord. I mean, it is it. I was in associations, you know, as great as I'm going to put it words, which is helpful if you like as PCH. Yeah. And I know what they like. I work for it and now give me landlords, you know, and go with being grateful to like Hazel. Yeah, organising quizzes and things like that. Our place. Um, I mean, I know that's not to do with a lot of this. 
Oksana [01:20:50] Yes, it is. It is. We're also talking about systems in place and maybe what the council is doing or what he's saying for you. It's all also a kind of facilitator services that help you stay in place. Yeah. So even things like that, so we're looking at different people right now. I was asking you to focus on more like physical environment. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:21:16] So you've got stairless, haven't you? It is not the one that goes up to the floor. And I think we have seen that. We've got that. Yeah. So it goes, that is lovely. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:21:29] Yeah, I've seen that in a DIY. Big S.O.S. Big. Yes, I think we've got a lift right goes right through to where he needs it, you know? That's brilliant. So outside lifts, you've got stairs outside haven't you? and you. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:21:46] Look by my own house, yeah, so. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:21:49] And you can get these external ones that take you off. It's like a stair's lift, but it's external 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:21:55] The one I'm thinking about to move back to the stairs up on the outside is a public footpath. Uh-Huh. Yeah. So that's a different part. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:22:07] We couldn't adapt where I used to be. I have what I have now because some of those that go through the others say that the future builds. It's already in place and things, but it's not like they can't be adapted. So this oh we need it to be installed. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:22:27] I also think it's important to appreciate what we've got. Yeah, I mean, yesterday, for example, if the gardener all day doing the gardens in the patch where I live, which is a big area with the dust bins in the middle, in a cage, and if we go up to the garden to have a cup of tea or coffee, you can do no wrong, you know? 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:22:47] Yeah, they're not allowed to stop for tea breaks. Well, not on official tea breaks. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:22:56] Awesome. Really good. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:22:58] Yeah. Very helpful. Even the ranges of caretakers. I know we can't I'm not allowed to come into your properties or if you need something, take it away, you can get outside your front door. The  communal , you know, and. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:23:18] And if they were to pick up steak every morning picking up the litter at nine o'clock. Wow. Yeah. Emptied the bins every couple of days. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:23:24] Yeah, yeah. So you know, we got we do get a lot of help. It is really, you know. Well, I suppose there will come a time when I feel for it. Some people will need to move because of the environment that it may not be suitable for them now. 
Oksana [01:23:43] Well, yes. You know what? The exact the same 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:23:48] It's hard to say because we all we all have different disabilities or health. I mean, we had a lady in our class. She was totally blind. And if you're having a coffee morning or bingo after you come down, play bingo. Somebody go for one of the residents of Walton, go and bring it down and take it back up again and ...
Speaker 3 (F) [01:24:11] I am about to have the bathroom changed because it's something I physically need. Yeah, and you said about being able to stay where I am. Yes, if I get worse, then the equipment that's being fitted, it can be again. I think this phrase know it's coming from a future group. They can adjust it so I can stay where I am, so I'm going to need. It's probably at some stage a way of showering and this new equipment can't be and have an add on so I can stay where I won't need help to be showered. So I'm keeping into handles. So that's important
Oksana [01:24:51] And so also the thing that you have right now is compatible with other upgrades. Sorry. So what you're saying that basically the things you have already in your house ever easy to change, 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:25:04] it will be based solely on this idea of being checked being built next week, and it's the hardest part of the electric service and Flamingo is once that's done and it looks perfectly normal. But if I get worse, they can adjust they can block put something onto that'll  help me, which again is thinking ahead. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:25:28] Improvements? 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:25:29] Yeah, thinking ahead. Yes, these things are built and put in it's thinkable ok. What like Bath? Possibly what you're saying? What do we need to put in now just in case? Yeah, I don't know if you understand. 
Oksana [01:25:44] Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. So like in the future, what could prevent you from staying at home? Or, on the other hand, what could help you? So you're saying that this new shower device would help you facilitator? 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:26:00] Sorry. 
Oksana [01:26:00] So that's what we call that facilitator is helpful for you. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:26:07] It's lucky that you live where you are, where I am. I'm coming down my bedroom world and I have for 12 months and I've been trying to get it. I have reported it and they keep saying Yes, yes, we'll do it. I've had scaffolding outside my flat for about 14 months. Nothing to do with me. It was a flat blow that took them a long time to cure their down. Yeah, when I said, Well, why can't you expand it because it sounds like no, why can't you expand it? Oh, no, all the scaffolding has got to come down and we'll just build a separate little one for you. Oh, how stupid! The scaffolding came down last week, but I don't know where I'm going to get mine. They are all removed. 
Oksana [01:26:53] Yes, black mould is a cord, so that mould actually could prevent you from staying there 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:27:03] It's not mould, it is just the black strips.
Speaker 2 (M) [01:27:07] But it can turn to mould 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:27:09] Yeah, and I have this severe case where and oh yes, it is definitely damp. It needs to be done. It's coming through the outside cladding. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:27:16] Yeah, but it could spot, I think, what you're saying. It could be that if you go too bad, they have to say yes, it's not suitable for it to stay. Yeah. So they need to put it right. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:27:28] That can affect your respiratory system, you know, breathe breathing and everything else you do. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:27:35] Do you pay rent ? 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:27:37] No, it's my own flat, but we're going to come on those factory housing. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:27:43] Oh, yeah, so you're at you're like leaseholder. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:27:50] Uh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:27:56] Yeah, I don't know whether that's how to get things done. Yeah, there's a rent payer. I don't know, you know, but you do find that it would be hard if you to get things done. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:28:10] I've never found it difficult to get things done. I tend to put it in writing. I write a fancy letter to the little department of PCH. And I think that's better than a telephone call. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:28:21] Oh, yes. Different landlords, again, the different levels of what they will do and what they want. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:28:29] And they've now just in the past week introduced a leasehold forum which is on Zoom. Yeah. And are you going to have a personal personal contact if you're a leaseholder to discuss any problems that might come up. 
Oksana [01:28:44] Yeah, we're talking about transport as well. Mm-Hmm. So is there something that could help make it more convenient for use of some sense of health in you? 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:28:56] Yeah, of course if it's more regular. laughs
Speaker 6 (F) [01:28:59] Yes, absolutely. I suppose we're looking at, we get a bus every half an hour. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:29:03] Yeah. The thing I I don't use buses now, but I've heard a lot of complaints from some of the residents. The post that goes from town to 25, I think, is a one to the Barbican and the Hoe. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:29:15] You have to be fine. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:29:17] And they went to use the normal single decker bus. In the summer they're using in the tourist bus. And then when the tourist bus comes and it's full up. Yeah, the regular people who live around there want to get to the doctors at West Hoe, can't get on the bus. Mm-Hmm. Mm hmm. And because of that, you know, enough, I think, is stupid. You don't need that. You can have the tourist bus on, but keep the 25 the normal service going instead of swapping it. You know, 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:29:48] there aren't the amount of seats on the blue buses downstairs. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:29:50] No, there isn't no there. So you get a lot less seats. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:29:54] I mean, you see people that are able to stand but they're still using seats. Yeah, yeah, that's interesting. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:30:02] So that, you know, that's here. I mean, I don't know about the rest, about the town and other areas. You know, I know you get some areas where the bus is every half an hour, and it can be every hour 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:30:15] You get unlucky, within five metres of my front door there's a bus every 10 minutes. The 51 or the 21. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:30:22] Yeah, I have to ask, what does Pepper think? Because his head is this is kind of, you know, he's looking down 
All [01:30:33] Laughs 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:30:38] It  is just too many red? Yeah. laughs
Speaker 5 (F) [01:30:48] It just gives you a right look, and .. 
All [01:30:48] Laughs 
Oksana [01:30:51] He's trying to learn. OK, so I actually we actually talked a lot about physical status in the first part, but for now, I'm just going to ask you to do exactly the same thing in the first topic because we're coming to the closure of this one as well. So could you maybe as well say like you could help us to summarise what about the three most important physical barriers that you see? And three most important facilitators? So helpful things. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:31:31] Oh, I think the facilitators is accessibility and that covers what you were saying about accessibility, and that's allowing for people like Gaynor to stay where she is, and she has to be able to use and things like that. And it's making it technology accessible as well. Mm hmm. So it's fair to say the barriers is the inaccessibility to those things. 
Oksana [01:32:11] Well, so basically this architecture is that it's better like stairs. Mm hmm. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:32:19] I love what you say about the house. Is that the future proofed? Yes. Yeah. We want more of that because we are an ageing population. Yeah. Yeah, we. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:32:33] It's already in place, we keep coming back to this thing, but it's you're off. 
All [01:32:37] Laughs 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:32:39] You might also make one comment about the accessibility and I mean, I know this room because the astronomical society used to meet in this room and I belong to that we had a long time, but it just doesn't seem to be a hearing in this room. 
Speaker 1 (M) [01:33:00] That's right. 
All [01:33:07] Laughs. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:33:08] Absolutely right. I noticed that. Yeah. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:33:11] But I mean, simple people in here were wearing hearing aids. But there isn't any hearing loop here.  A hearing loop is something that you  fix in the room, it's not difficult, you put wires all around the room. We have one in the church, and so people with wearing hearing aids, they can set their hearing aid to the new system and then they can hear it might be worth mentioning this to university. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:34:14] we have that problem on our face. So when you get a group of people sat down just talking amongst themselves. And then somebody's phone rings. And she talked about the fact that I can't hear you, there is too much noise. People I feel like say, Well, don't stay here on your phone. Go somewhere where it's quiet. They don't. You know you're right about these hearing aids. I've heard about, you know what? I don't need them. I just don't listen 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:34:47] to him just yet. Yes, you should be like in our church yet we're hearing aids. And she said it's the hidden disability, and she wear them for the service and as soon as the service was out, she's taken them off and goes,  
Speaker 2 (M) [01:35:03] Well, but is it an invisible disability? People don't notice.
Speaker 6 (F) [01:35:07] but they don't have a lot of patience with usual deaf. with blind people she can always... Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:35:16] Something I suppose I've learnt living where I live with people. We've been hearing aids and someone say, Can you speak up or or can you seat on this side to make? Because that's be good. It has to be bad, you know,. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:35:30] or speak more slowly. Yeah, I mean, I'm finding that with the telephone. You know, these companies occasionaly rang, and I get blown and I say, please start again slowly. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:35:41] Yeah, yeah, I'm lucky with my phone, I press on something and then it comes out very loud,. 
Speaker 6 (F) [01:35:49] But OK, so OK, you have used technology to help you. 
Marco [01:35:51]  Sorry just one comment about the hearing loop. There are other buildings in the university. I don't know if  you have been to their Roland Levinsky building, for example, but there is a cinema in that building and we do have a hearing loop there. Now, the rooms in this building at the moment are having a lot of refurbishment. And my view, one of my colleagues who is very important in the refurbishments of the rooms, because now what we want is to be able to teach from here for students who are not going to be able to attend the class, but to get watching from home. For example, we want to be able to move in the room. And then from home, to be able to see that we are movoing around and be able to hear even if you are not speaking in front of the microphone. So at the moment, I think the things for the technology and to be able to teach people who are at home is what has taken the priority because of the virus. But we do have buildings with hearing loops and there is also a new building that is going to be here. So I don't know if you have seen the Babage building that is here in the  close. And that's because it's going to be removed completely. Oh, so there is a new building that is going to be built behind.  and again my colleague here, is very involved in the construction. I mean, he's not building construction so, so very soon the landscape of that campus is going to change because it's not so bad. We have to wait for the moment. So yes, they are older buildings and I mean, blowing the on discussion of individual structural stuff amongst buildings, facilitating access to people with particular disability. So we spend quite a lot of time talking with the architects to design and to facilitate to create structure in the buildings themselves. These just easier than some of those points are being considered and are considered. But the discussion took place. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:38:28] Some people think of ISO because  I've hearing loop in the communal room. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:38:34] Yes. Yes. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:38:36] I just said about physical places. And I have to say it's a criticism of the university. Where I live my home, I can only live one door away because threshold strips. Mm. Yeah. And I'm talkative I couldn't get out of the kitchen,  because the designers need to think, of, this is my soapbox. There are too many able bodied designers designing for disabled people. Yeah, they need to sit in a wheelchair and go round themselves. So that's just my soapbox that it might be. What I have come today. I had a real struggle to find somewhere to get to get in and to come out of the and the Cafe out the cafe. Yeah. You get to live with that. Yeah, yeah. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:39:35] Yeah. I would worry about catching me. I've got new leg, which we only got yesterday. I worried about catching that on these walking behind me. Careful, careful. You know, like you say, if you're in a wheelchair... 
All [01:39:48] Laughs 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:39:51] A  big thing for yourself, I'm looking at the factors you're looking at, for me to stay there what was said to me recently? It's all right. The fire brigade will get you just get over the threshold to stand outside. So that way gonna happen. It's something that I'm fighting at the minute. Yeah, it's a big issue. And it might has been adapted for me, both ongoing and there's a few blows. This is the same. It's not only once inside, it's getting in and out, which is also an issue, and you've got stairs and stuff and something you can't get out it's something you never get over. But whereas I would have thought reasonable to adapt or to adjust, and that is a reason to stay where if I would have to move, I'm lucky it can be done. But there are places if you want to stay in your own home, there has to be a way of making from this part of accessibility not only in where you live, getting in and I'm sure that that makes sense. 
Oksana [01:40:59] Yes. Yeah. Yeah, we were talking a lot about accessibility, right? I was wondering if there is something about like, for example, cooking or getting out of bed, if there is something that could help this basically. Is there something in your house if you already use that is helping you to do that? 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:41:22] I'm working on this at the minute, 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:41:25] but what I find very helpful with cooking, particularly in the sense that, you know,. 
Hazel [01:41:31] Do you have a living in your flats that you can pull if you're not? Well, you know 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:41:38] One in the hallway and one in the bathroom we've got Pendants Show. We've got we've got also got wristbands, which you can use. Um, I was given a wristband. Yeah. So many run my flat number. It comes through the intercom I can answer it without getting off the chair. press it once to speak to the person you know you. Plus a second time when the doors open, which I thought it was fantastic. I'd never seen that before. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:42:10] That's well, first, that comes back to self-care, but well to tell you when someone says the word, isn't it? You go, Oh yes, to stay where I am, if I have a problem, if I do well enough to comfort me, rock, as you say, get to know me. If I fall there is a technology, I can get home. But without that, you didn't have somebody like that who taught me that's have to go the care home. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:42:43] Some people have to pay for that out their own pocket, don't they? 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:42:47] It's not too bad. It's not cheap, I used to pay. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:42:49] I don't know. I don't know. I know in Marlborough how some people in the flat say 
Oksana [01:42:54] something to say about cooking. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:42:56] Mm. Yeah. But I found very useful that cooking is my oven packed up and I bought a new one. I bought a Hotpoint It cost me a hundred quid on the internet that was all. And it had this facility, which I find invaluable, and that is when I put something under the grill, I then put the timer on. Yeah, but it switched itself off. So so now where I've previously I forgot about it and it just had burnt bacon. it's not done perfectly because I know exactly how many minutes it was it switched iself off, so often they try to get carried away watching something for example. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:43:34] My hob, every ring on my hob I can set a timer on and it would go off. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:43:46] We've got our alarms going off. Oh yeah, because somebody fell asleep on the sofa and that's something on the hob, wherever, you know. And it's a brilliant idea. Yeah. I mean, if I'm doing chips in a chip pan, I don't like these fryers. It's the horrible thing. I like your standard chip pan. I stand by that cooker from start to finish, then you get often. But I'm fortunate I can do that, you know, again. So it's hard for me to say what barriers may come in front of me that 20 years. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:44:24] Why if every time I've put something on the hob, but if I have to leave the kitchen, and the chance of that cliff, would you not believe it? But like the open, it's perfect if you remember to do it. Oh, the grill, the oven to set because I know I have to because of the technology on that is absolutely out of control
Speaker 2 (M) [01:44:46] I might be able to draw a line at low 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:44:50] Each hob I could turned off in time. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:44:51] I haven't got the manual for it and that was given to me. If you're two years old and it was given to me, and so I would give it to you from the air fryer to a proper conventional cooker, which I've always liked. So I don't know whether it was this guy. I know it's got a timer on running for the oven, whether it's for anything else on that, I don't know. I can probably download the manual for it. Oh, I thought you was saying that. 
Oksana [01:45:26] Cheryl, I'll try to summarise and look, just tell me she agreed because it was a very insightful discussion and had lots of things mentioned. So I guess we have the accessibility of the house is a big party. So all the physical things and all the physical things of health, like the ratings and accessible kitchen accessible bathroom are things that help. So these are one positive and one negative. And that's what food understood is technology is generally helpful, but it has to be accessible and it has to be safe and easy. Yeah, like I felt a lot of concern about technology might run you in trouble if you do something wrong and that makes you scared of it. Um, is that correct? That's right. Yeah. OK. So I put that to the timer for cooking in the same bracket because it's also a kind of safety feature, isn't it? And I'm a big fan of that thing as well because I forget things in the ovevn. In the barriers, like we didn't do that. Much right now, but in the previous session, we talked a lot about communication that so many things right now are online and not adapted for people who are not as well, but I'm not used to doing things online. So all of these administrative in many cases. So I guess I would put it and a big surge barrier. So do you think there is a consensus? Would you like to add something else? That's what was the last to the communication. We didn't speak about it right now, but I felt in a previous session we mentioned it as a big barrier that all of the administrative and medical communication you have to go online and it's it's really not about it. 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:47:31] It's it's it's getting it's getting worse as hard as times going on the stopping you just using the phone and you're being forced into it, which I think is wrong. But to do this, it's not to be human. Yes, and that's where I live there. But there are a lot of people who say I called that one particular service pool and said, we call this all medication, and they said, Well, we're not going to do this anymore. And that is wrong. Go online doing an e-consult. I am speaking to the doctor. I have to do. So want to hear how many people are falling sick because of it? And I think that is a huge barrier and it is causing people to go to the special care, because they're not being as that. What we don't mind coming up to date a doctor place isn't great. But outside agencies have also got to realise they've got to. We're not all. On the same page is that we're not using the technology. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:48:38] Can I think something? It's not my it's been a relative inclusion actually. Having come to me, ask me, I have no idea that, you know, when you're saying you need to say your GP service? Yeah, go username, password. Yeah. And sometime in which is going come into a password not recognised and it and then you should turn out. Her son checked her computer it wasn't her computer, it was a GP sensor, it was. There is a code and she couldn't get through to a doctor and she needed medication urgently nebuliser, you know, um, I've never used mine since it went online. I've never used it. Not that I don't want to. I don't even know what the website address is, so I have to ring them open. Ask them where you can get through. Um, that's the problem. You know, technical stuff, folks, and stuff like that. If the system's going down. Yeah. To Ringo, oh, you'd have to try again tomorrow. Love to try again tomorrow. An actual person, you could be dead by tomorrow. You know, I mean, not everybody knows it when you're feeling unwell, it's life threatening. Yeah. And you're ringing the GP because you don't want to bother your neighbours. 
Speaker 4 (M) [01:50:04] The other thing is, the older we get, I think safety is very, very important, you know? Yeah, I when I moved into my place, I bought myself from the re-use centre in Union Street, a tumble dryer. I paid ten quid for it. Yeah. And I got it home and it worked. I look on the internet and it was suspect to fire. Yeah. So I ran the Whirlpool and I said, Look, I've got a tumble dryer of yours and you say it's one of the other risks. So they said that's all right give me the serial number, and within two weeks they did bring me a new one. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:50:38] Oh, that's fair enough! laughs
Speaker 6 (F) [01:50:39] OK. I know. Yeah, but you were able to ring them up. That's right. Yeah. You think if they had? 
Speaker 5 (F) [01:50:46] Yeah, yeah, you hadn't realised that the word risk was. 
Speaker 2 (M) [01:50:50] That's right. Are a lot of time. You've got to go on the internet to find the phone number so. Yeah, it does happen. Yeah, I got news. I bought a scooter that can run from better life. Yeah. Lloyd's chemist used to sell, 
Oksana [01:51:11] Sorry, yeah, I just got the words of actually, taxes have arrived. So I actually had one more topic to discuss, but we we sort of discussed it already. So it was also about all the social support. It might get the community support. But, you know, is like, we have to let it go. I guess this was the first with this group, and Michael was being very faithful to the timing and the discussions were very discussions. So very interesting. I didn't mean to interrupt you. So I am a little bit over time. All right. So just quickly, if you have any other questions, right? Let me know. 
Speaker 3 (F) [01:51:53] There's going to be a follow up session, I guess. 
Oksana [01:51:57] So the idea is that we invited you today for a discussion on the focus group. Later, we're going to have this experiment, actually. So we were going to look at your interaction with Robot, invited one by one, interact with Robot in it in another laboratory at the university. Oh, yes. So it's going to happen a little bit later in the autumn. We have to prepare all of the setup and we will let you know the little white invites one by one. It will be in a space of about 30 minutes, probably, and we will communicate with you through Hazel about that. Yeah. So I'm really thankful to you all for coming here and spending your time with us. It's really, really helpful. And well, I'll see you later in the autumn.